
Dear London Chainsaw Training LCT, 
The Forestry Commission’s Plant Heath Ips typographus team are carrying out proactive engagement with companies and organisations that provide chainsaw training courses. This is to raise awareness of the restrictions on felling, moving and stacking Picea (spruce) material within the Ips typographus Demarcated Area (see map).
 
Ips typographus is a serious pest of Picea (spruce). If this beetle were to establish in Great Britain, it could cause significant economic damage to our spruce-based industries. Details about the pest and our response to it can be found at: 
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/eight-toothed-european-spruce-bark-beetle-ips-typographus

Ips typographus Demarcated Area
If you are working within the Ips typographus Demarcated Area (see map), there are specific felling, movement and stacking restrictions on spruce trees and spruce material. Detailed information about these restrictions can be found here: Apply for Ips typographus authorisation to fell and process spruce trees - GOV.UK
As a company that offers chainsaw training/Arboriculture courses within or bordering the Ips typographus Demarcated Area, you may encounter spruce while delivering on site training activities. We wanted to make you aware of the regulations and restrictions on spruce management and provide a point for contact if authorisation is required.
Details including links to further resources can be found at the end of this email.

Ips typographus Notice 7 (2024) includes the following conditions:
 
(i) Restrictions on the felling of susceptible material without prior notification. Notice must be provided of intention to fell relevant material at least 14 days in advance of any felling in the demarcated areas. Felling may only commence once written authorisation is provided the Forestry Commission.
 
(ii) Restrictions on the killing of trees (either by ring-barking, chemical injection or application, mechanical means, biological control or arboricultural intervention) of the genus Picea A. Dietr over 3 meters in height, without prior notification. All operations must be agreed in writing by the Forestry Commission.
 
(iii) Prohibition on susceptible material being left in situ, unless authorised in writing by a plant health inspector.
 
(iv) Prohibition on the movement of spruce (Picea A. Dietr) material with bark (for example, wood with bark, isolated bark, live trees over 3 metres) that has originated within the demarcated area.
 
It is also recommended that any spruce trees showing symptoms of Ips typographus are reported via a TreeAlert.

Felling Licences
You may need permission to fell standing trees in the form of a felling licence, unless the trees are completely dead, pose a significant and immediate risk (this applies to every tree), or the volume is within the allowed quarterly limit of 5m3. Guidance on felling licences is available here - Tree felling: getting permission 
If you're at all uncertain about felling licensing requirements, then you should contact a Forestry Commission Woodland Officer before carrying out any operations (see map). Felling licence requirements and approval are separate from spruce felling and authorisation. 

For the latest news and information on Ips typographus, please visit the following link: Latest Ips typographus Information. 
To find the latest resources for Ips typographus, please visit: Latest Resources. 
If you would like to discuss the Ips typographus restrictions with the Forestry Commission directly, please contact the Ips typographus Team by:
Email: ips.t@forestrycommssion.gov.uk
Phone: 0300 067 4454.
Yours sincerely,
Ips typographus Project Team
Plant Health Forestry
Forestry Commission

Privacy Notice

The Forestry Commission processes your personal data in connection with its statutory duties under plant health legislation (https://www.gov.uk/guidance/tree-health-legislation). The personal data we process may include your name and contact details. This data may be obtained directly from you or from third parties such as other government bodies or public records.

The lawful basis for processing your personal data is Article 6(1)(e) UK GDPR (task carried out in the public interest) in accordance with our legal powers. Providing your personal data may be a legal requirement and failure to provide it may prevent us from carrying out our statutory duties.

Your personal data may be shared with contractors, agents, service providers, and other organisations acting on our behalf where necessary to fulfil our statutory functions.

We retain your personal data only for 3-years in line with our retention policies.

Your data may be stored in the UK or the European Union. Where data is transferred outside the UK, appropriate safeguards will be applied in accordance with data protection law.

You have rights in relation to your personal data, including the right to request access, rectification, erasure, restriction of processing, and to object to processing where applicable. If you believe your information is inaccurate, please contact us to have it corrected.

We do not use your personal data for automated decision-making or profiling.

For more information on how we handle personal data and your rights, see our Personal Information Charter: https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/forestry-commission/about/personal-information-charter

The Forestry Commission is registered as a data controller under the Data Protection Act 2018 (Registration No: Z6542658).

If you have any concerns, you can contact the Forestry Commissions Data Protection Officer dataprotection@forestrycommission.gov.uk or the supervisory authority, the Information Commissioner: www.ico.org.uk



 



Disclaimer

The information contained in this communication from the sender is confidential. It is intended solely for use by the recipient and others authorised to receive it. If you are not the recipient, you are hereby notified that any disclosure, copying, distribution or taking action in relation of the contents of this information is strictly prohibited and may be unlawful.

This email has been scanned for viruses and malware.

